---
title: April 2020 work in progress - Quarantine edition n. II
drafts: false
date: 2020-04-30T10:01:21+01:00
layout: monthly
description: slow and steady, wetest data release
---

# Actions performed (they goes on April reporting)

On facebook.tracking.exposed we purge cyclically data. The data is backup and not accessible as historical reference. This because might be interesting, in the future, see how Facebook HTML and timelines looked like back in time. The data collected from our infrastructure is divided in two group:

1) information submitted by browser extension
2) information generated by us, based on the data above, still inheriting ownership.

The data on point 1 are subject to our data retention policy, our primary goal on this is **don't fill the hard drive** because that is our bottleneck. Data on point 2 are subject to your (if you are one of our adopters) data retention policy, the data there are only useful to you, and as long as you let them available on Tracking Exposed, they might contribute to statistics and aggregated data.

In the online server, everything received before 2019-01-01 got wiped.

Other platform (such as youtube), we differently organize data retention policy (still work in progress):

    switched to db facebook
    PRIMARY> db.timelines2.count({ "startTime" :{  "$lt": new Date("2018-01-01") }} )
    0
    PRIMARY> db.timelines2.count({ "startTime" :{  "$lt": new Date("2019-01-01") }} )
    590177
    PRIMARY> db.timelines2.remove({ "startTime" :{  "$lt": new Date("2019-01-01") }} )
    WriteResult({ "nRemoved" : 590177 })

With the command above we deleted the timelines, the object linking all the impressions to an user and to a unique sequence.

    PRIMARY> db.impressions2.remove({ "impressionTime": { "$lt": new Date("2019-01-01") }} )
    WriteResult({ "nRemoved" : 7619540 })

With the above we deleted impressions, an object reporting if the impression is public or private, and if there is an HTML (public posts).
Private post have an impression number, and this guarantee a sequence. impressionOrder come from 1 to the length of the timelines.

    PRIMARY> db.htmls2.remove({ "savingTime" : { "$lt" : new Date("2019-01-01") } })
    WriteResult({ "nRemoved" : 4586490 })

Remove the HTML collection.


It should be documented how these information are the one provided by people, subject to cyclic cleaning.
The metadata, a separated column

---


# TODOS project management (20 April)

https://github.com/tracking-exposed/youtube.tracking.exposed/projects/1

Here important the privacy updates required to every extension from Mozilla and Google. we'll begin by youtube.

In addition, there is a work in progress on parsing more information from youtube format, necessary for [wetest1](https://youtube.tracking.exposed/wetest/1).

## Italian below

C'è stata la puntata di LOST del 19 Aprile 2020, con interessanti spunti al minuto 50. La puntata completa e più opzioni la si trova [qui](https://archive.org/details/20200419loco19) al minuto 59:15 inizia Giulia x Trex!, qui l'[mp3](https://archive.org/download/20200419loco19/2020-04-19-loco19.mp3)

## Testi da rivedere e produrre.

Abbiamo:
1) un testo prodotto a luglio da formattare (e forse dividere in 2)
2) il testo letto a LOST https://hackmd.io/@popcorn/r1UY-RFdU?both
3) https://pad.riseup.net/p/trexvirusprivacy questo con Covid, aspettare i primi risultati di wetest
4) https://pad.riseup.net/p/trexvirusprivacy-version2 questo su privacy, va integrato con tutto il wishfulthinking che abbiamo
